All right, so
the first thing that we're gonna be
talking about are animation fundamentals.
These are all the building blocks we need
to actually get started with animations.
And so the first question is why animate?
And so there's two main reasons for that.
The first is guidance and clarification.
And just like we talked about before,
we want to use animation for a purpose.
We want to guide the user to doing things
and to seeing where things come from.
And I'm gonna be talking about this a lot,
but seeing how one state
transitions to another state.
And so this is really important,
especially if you're
used to mobile phones.
You have these motion design idioms on
your phone where when you click something,
it might expand, it might slide to
the left, or slide to the right.
And that's not meant to be flashy,
it's meant to inform the user,
again, what could happen and
what did happen.
The other thing, the other reason for
why we animate is first dial in branding.
So just like your website or your web
application might have a palette of
colors, different fonts and font sizes
that are used throughout the app in
different spacing primitives, there
is also animation primitives as well.
So that's why when it comes to style and
branding, having a consistent fill for
animation is really, really important.
So you want to be able to choose your
durations, choose your timing functions,
and choose the kinds of animations that
you're doing in a consistent way so
that your app feels cohesive.
And also so that it gives the user
trust that they know when they're
in that app and they can expect things to
basically work the same and feel the same.
So the first fundamental that we're
gonna be talking about is duration.
Now when we talk about animation or
transition duration,
this is how long an iteration of
an animation takes to complete.
Now I put iteration in there because some
animations can actually be infinite.
Like, for example, if you're loading
a site and it takes a really, really long
time, it might feel like that spinner is
going on forever, and ever, and ever.
So what is the duration of that?
Well, the total duration might be
infinity, it might not be, but
I've seen websites where it will
literally not stop loading and
you're not sure whether
there's an error or not.
And, I mean, to fix that problem,
I have other workshops on state machines
where you could sort of avoid that issue.
But when we're talking about duration,
we're talking about how long one
iteration of that animation takes.
So, taking the spinner as an example,
we could say that the spinner
takes one second or
maybe half a second to go
one full rotation around.
And so
even though it might go on infinitely,
the duration of it is
just one second long.
There's also delay.
And so a delay is how long it takes before
an animation or a transition starts.
So, when you click something,
it might wait a little bit
before actually doing something.
And delays are actually really useful for
orchestrating animations too.
And we're going to get into that as well.
Delays might also present a little problem
when you're doing orchestrated animations,
because a delay only happens once.
And so remember, delay is from the time
before you start an animation.
If your animation has many iterations,
that delay is only going to
apply to the first iteration.
So that's something that's really
important to keep in mind.
But delay is a very useful tool.
The third thing is something
that actually might be tricky.
And so, I'd love to talk about
this more in detail, but
it's the timing function,
also known as the easing of the animation.
And so,
this is how the animation feels, or
how it accelerates and
decelerates over time.
So if an animation takes one second
long and you have a linear easing,
which we're going to show in a minute,
then that is going
to have the same consistent
speed from beginning to end.
However, you could define
the easing using cubic-bezier or
a few CSS keywords, and
that's actually going to help you define
how an animation accelerates and
decelerates at the end.
Now, the cubic-bezier syntax
might seem really weird.
There's four numbers,
you're not sure what those numbers do.
And it's actually a lot
simpler than you might think.
So the first two numbers,
if you imagine this curve like this,
we have two control points.
We have the first control points,
which is the control point for
the start of our curve.
And the second control point is the
control point for the end of our curve.
So this 0.50, think of it as coordinates.
We have x at 0.5,
which is halfway through, and
y at 0, so it's at the very bottom.
Now for the next one,
we have x at 0.5 again, and y at 1.
So it's going to be at the very top.
And so, if you play the around
with tools such as Figma or
Adobe Illustrator, you might be
used to this cubic-bezier thing and
how the control points affect
the shape of the cubic-bezier curve.
So we could see here that, especially
when compared to just a straight line,
that was a terrible straight line,
but you get the idea.
That this animation is actually
gonna start a little bit slow and
then it's gonna speed up in the middle and
then it's going to slow down
a little bit at the end.
And that's really hard to
read these cubic-beziers.